## Analysis Report

# Section 1: General Description of the Project
The project purpose is to create a small, simple, and unique video game within the allotted time period for this project. The project outcomes, or goals, are to ensure the project functions as a desktop or laptop executable file, remains bug-free, provides enjoyment to those that download and play it, and above all, fulfills the requirements of this project. The features of this project would include engaging visuals and enjoyable gameplay. This project would likely only have a single end deliverable, the completed game. However, three early builds may be compiled as well, intended to be used to create the three demo videos required over the course of the semester. The project is intended to be used in the same way as any video game, played. 

Like any video game, the opportunities that this product is intended to “address” are providing additional entertainment and making a profit of some sort, though the game created for this project will only be focused on the first objective. 

The target audience includes anyone interested in video games of the platformer genre, who would use this product as another form of entertainment.

This project will be making use of the C++ coding language, because the development engine that will be used is the Unreal Engine, which primarily runs on the C++ coding language.

The code of this product will be posted to GitHub, as requested, and the product itself would be posted to an online video game store such as Steam, if it were intended to be formally sold. For the purposes of this project, the executable file will simply be delivered directly. 


# Section 2: Identify the Project Objectives
The functions of this product are relatively simple. As mentioned above, the nature of the product as a video game means that its primary function, above all else, is to provide entertainment. Beyond that, its only other function would be to generate a profit, if it were a full release instead of a senior project. 

The flow of the processes consists of a few specific phases. The first phase is planning, in which such decisions as the genre of the game and determining of the audience are made. 
The second phase is pre-production, in which such choices as story, artstyle, and milestone scheduling are made, to build on the decisions made in the planning phase. The third phase is production, which involves the actual development of the game, rendering of assets, and the like to fit the choices made in the pre-production phase. The fourth phase is testing, in which bugs are identified and smaller issues are ironed out, such as whether or not the game’s mechanics are enjoyable, after the game has been made playable at the conclusion of the production phase. The next stage, and the final stage relevant to this project, is launch, in which as many of the identified bugs as can be reasonably fixed are fixed and the overall product receives some additional polish, before it is finally released.

The learning objectives of this project are to improve my skill with coding and to provide myself with additional experience in independent game development, by familiarizing myself with the design, production, and deployment processes of the industry in the form of this small project.


# Section 3: Identify Decision Criteria Important to Developing This Project
The most critical decision to be made when developing a game is simply what kind of game one intends to develop, also known as the game’s genre. The genre of game that one wishes to make determines almost everything about the following development process, from how much time will need to be allotted for development, to how large the budget for the game will need to be, to even the ways in which the game will be marketed. Therefore, this criterion receives a rank of 10. In this case, the chosen genre is a simple side-scroller. 

The next most important decision to be made concerns the early concepting of art styles. Because of the impact that this can have on a game’s tone and audience, this criterion will be given a rank of 9. This platformer will have a cartoonish style, reminiscent of such games as those in Mario and Sonic franchises. 

The third most important decision to be made involves the scheduling of milestones. However, this particular project has built-in milestones as a result of the course setup, meaning that this decision has essentially already been made. As a result, this criterion receives a rank of 5. While milestones are incredibly and milestones before the class-determined milestones can be created, the fact that any milestones already exist at all makes this a far less impactful decision, hence the above ranking of 5.

The fourth most important decision, and the final one made as part of this project, is how much time should be allotted for each phase of development. This refers to the amount of time that should be spent in the planning phase, the pre-production phase, the production phase, and the testing phase. This criterion receives a rank of 8, as it determines how time will be spent on this project throughout the semester. Roughly  15% of the development time will be spent in the planning phase, 20% in the pre-production phase, 40% in the production phase, and 25% in the testing phase, before providing the finished product.


# Section 4: Developing Alternatives.
Two potentially viable alternatives for the genre of the game have been chosen. The first is a three-dimensional platformer instead of a two-dimensional one, once again similar to recent releases in the Mario and Sonic franchises. The second alternative is the development of a relatively simplistic first person shooter, as they are presently among the most popular genres of video games to release every year. This means that there are significant amounts of existing assets and templates to assist in the development of a new one by a small team, though some complications may arise in altering these assets enough to make the game feel unique.

Two potential styles have been chosen as alternatives to the more cartoonish one that is currently planned. The first is a form of stylized realism, this involves creating more realistic body shapes, but adding aspects to them that appear to “pop” off the screen, much like characters in a comic book. The second alternative is a style that takes advantage of negative space, making use of a more silhouetted style with “neon” edges to the character models, which would resemble the Tron Legacy film in their level of contrast and vibrancy. 

There are two present plans for alternative milestone schedules. The first plan for an alternative milestone schedule is to schedule them for exactly one week prior to all of the required milestones for this project throughout the semester. The second plan is to add additional milestones at set intervals, specifically setting up a milestone every two weeks, in addition to the three required milestones.

Finally, there are two main alternatives to the amount of time that will be spent in each phase of the development process. These alternatives were chosen based on the belief that production and testing are the most important phases of this process, and that  increasing the amount of time spent on either or both of them will result in the greatest benefit for the project. The first alternative division of time is to spend 10% of development time in the planning phase, 20% in the pre-production phase, 40% in the production phase, and 30% in the testing phase. The second alternative division of time is to  spend 10% of the development time in the planning phase, 10% in the pre-production phase, 40% in the production phase, and 40% in the testing phase


# Section 5: Analyze Alternatives
To address the first alternative genre of game, a three-dimensional platformer, it will be relatively easy to convert a two-dimensional platformer into one such game, as it would require few changes to the overall design methodology, only requiring that the new perspective be accounted for in that methodology. The most complicated aspect of this alternative is the necessity to retrieve, produce, or purchase additional assets, which will result in either an increase in development time or development cost, depending on which of these three options is selected. The second alternative genre, a first-person shooter, is one of the most popular genres in the world, as stated above. This means that there are significant amounts of existing assets and templates to assist in the development of a new first-person by a small team, making it very simple to adapt the development process to this genre. Despite this, it is possible that complications may arise in altering these assets enough to make the game marketable, which is critically important to the success of a game in this genre as a result of its ubiquity in the industry.

To address the first alternative art style, stylized realism is a very familiar art style in many games, meaning that users would likely feel an immediate sense of familiarity with the final product, increasing their willingness to engage with it. The disadvantages of this style are that it would require more time in the pre-production phase, as creating new art assets for a style shift such as this one would take a significant amount of time. It would not be infeasible by any means, but would necessarily add additional time to this phase and take time away from other phases. To address the second alternative art style, choosing a more silhouetted style with highlights that takes advantage of negative space would result in a more striking visual image, and would allow for less detail overall on the character models. The downside is that such a style requires a near-complete rework of the visual style of a more cartoonish game, and would need additional lighting work on all the character models to properly fulfill the player’s expectations of what a game with such an artstyle should look like in motion.

To address the first alternative milestone setup idea, setting personal milestones a week before required milestones allows for some breathing room between personal milestones and required milestones, thereby making the required milestones less stressful to reach and giving a greater opportunity to fix any issues that arise in testing prior to a required milestone date. The potential downside of this idea is that if more significant issues arise than are anticipated, it may take more than a week to fix them, resulting in a subpar delivery for the required milestones. To address the second alternative milestone schedule idea, setting up personal milestones every two weeks would allow me to break the project apart into more manageable “chunks” and enable more targeted development of features. However, this could also result in additional stress to reach each milestone, especially when considering work that must be done in other courses, and could result in several missed personal milestones, requiring significant rescheduling to ensure that all required features are eventually implemented.

The two alternative time divisions result in a number of significant benefits and drawbacks. The first, which emphasizes putting additional time into the testing phase, has the obvious benefit of allowing for significantly more bug identification, bug fixing, and product evaluation before the final product’s release, likely resulting in an overall increase in the product’s final quality. The downside is that this particular time division diverts time away from the planning phase, meaning there is less time to fully decide on the game’s genre, audience, and other such things which will have effects on the pre-launch phase. However, that phase is entirely irrelevant to this project, reducing the impact of this downside. The second, which also emphasizes spending as much time as possible in the testing phase has the same benefits, but allots even more time to this phase, increasing the potential impact of those benefits, by allotting just as much time for testing as production. The downside is that this particular time division diverts time away from the pre-production phase, providing less time to fully determine development milestones and create early prototypes, which has the potential to cause issues in the production phase. 


# Section 6: Select the Best Alternative
An alternative is not likely to be needed, but if one should become necessary, a three-dimensional platformer would be the superior option. The ability to preserve existing design methodology, storyboarding, audience, and assets, means that only minor milestone rescheduling and prototype modification would be needed. 

If an alternative is needed, the silhouetted art style is the superior option. It would not require a complete shift away from the cartoonish art style described above, and would allow for less detailed character models, reducing the amount of work necessary to adapt the existing models to this art style.

Should an alternative milestone schedule become necessary, the choice of setting milestones to specific and frequent intervals is the superior option. Setting these intervals would allow for a better division of time and allow for the setting of smaller and more easily achievable milestones, maintaining morale through the project.

If an alternative time division becomes necessary, the choice of diverting time away from the planning phase would be the superior option. This is because in the case of this project, most of the planning phase’s primary objectives have already been completed. In addition to that, this time division only requires a diverting of 5% of time dedicated to the planning phase, with no other time diversions from other phases, unlike the other alternative, which requires more diverted time in exchange for its benefits. 


# Section 7: Implementing the Alternative
If necessary, the implementation of the fully three-dimensional platforming genre will be accomplished through the addition of cameras to the existing two-dimensional scene, and the expansion of that scene to allow for additional assets to be created and placed in a large enough environment for the three-dimensional platforming game to function. In addition to this, more assets will be created and purchased to assist in forming more expansive environments, so that the gameplay mechanics of the two-dimensional game are able to be properly expanded upon to work in a fully three-dimensional space.

If necessary, the implementation of the silhouetted art style will be accomplished by simply reducing the number of colors on the models down to a number of different shades of black that exhibit enough contrast to one another that motion can still be conveyed. In addition to this, the planned “neon” highlighting will be achieved via texture modification and changes to the lighting of the environment, such that edges of the character models and environment models reflect the colors of the lights around them in a way that is visually striking.

If necessary, the implementation of the interval milestones will be easily accomplished by breaking up the milestone goals into their component parts, assigning each component part to a different interval milestone, and setting the combination of those component parts as the objective for the required milestones.

If necessary, adjusting the time division among the different phases of the project will be accomplished by changing the dates at which each phase will start and end, while compensating appropriately for these changes by making modifications to the goals of each phase.


# Section 8: Evaluating the Decision Effectiveness
If any of these alternative plans become necessary, they will still succeed in achieving the project objectives. The objectives of this particular project are simply to create a functioning app or desktop executable, provide enjoyment to those who engage with it, and simulate the development and release of a video game. There are no apparent logical reasons why any of these alternatives would interfere with that original objective. Therefore, these alternative plans will achieve the project objective. The original plans were all created with the project objective strictly in mind, and were chosen with the express intent of achieving the project objective according to the requirements presented. Both the original plans and the alternative plans will take a minimum of 180 hours to complete, will be able to be recorded for the requisite demo videos, and will result in the production of fully functioning executable desktop files by the end of the project period. 


[Return to Homepage](https://tkfromthe90s.github.io/)
